and some of your Publications talk about
cancer as a metabolic disease and
specifically a dysfunction of the
mitochondria can you can you talk a bit
about that
yeah so
um I mean this goes back to the work of
Otto Warburg uh in the 1920s and 30s and
40s where he defined that cancer
originated from damage to
um mitochondria uh and that then
elicited a whole series of changes
uh forcing the cell into a fermentation
mechanism to survive
um and and we we have uh validated and
confirmed warburg's original finding so
in order to do that uh what I did was to
go through the through the literate the
scientific literature looking looking at
um electron
micrographs the very high magnification
of my of mitochondrion tissues because
you can't see them under light
microscopic microscopy in order to look
at the structure of the mitochondria in
the cytoplasm of the cell you need you
really need electron
electron microscopy scanning electron
microscopy and then when you look at so
what I did is I went and I looked at all
the major cancers probably representing
95 of all uh cancer deaths caused by by
these kinds of cancers and then and I
went back through the 50s and 60 fifth
1950s 60s 70s because in a lot of
medical schools uh people would be
looking at cancer tissue with electron
microscopy and then you go to those
papers and and you look and see what
they found with respect to the the
number and structure of the mitochondria
in those tissues and invariably they
were abnormal structurally and even even
if one were to isolate them and look at
the biochemistry it was abnormal
um so we have never found normal
mitochondria in any kind of a major
cancer okay so if you don't have normal
mitochondria that means your cells are
not going to be able to generate energy
through normal respiratory systems like
oxidative phosphorylation and this is
exactly what Warburg said he said
mitochondria oxidative phosphorylation
becomes irreversibly damaged in all
cancers regardless of where they come
from thereby forcing them into a
fermentation mechanism and that's what
the characteristics of all cancer cells
are they ferment and and then what we
did is what we did is we well Warburg
knew glucose was the lactic acid
fermentation derived from glucose was
the major fuel at that time we have now
defined glutamine as a second
fermentable fuel the field had think
thought for many years that glutamine
was being respired no it's not respired
it's fermented so the two fermentation
fuels that drive the majority is not all
cancers are a a sugar fermentation and
an amino acid fermentation and without
the glucose and glutamine no cancer cell
can survive so our our goal is to
scientifically validate fermentation
mechanism for a glutamine and uh and
show how Warburg was right uh on his
original description but he also did not
have new information which would clarify
and saw and and resolve this entire
cancer issue and we're in the process of
doing this right now yeah that's
fantastic and and so what are some of
the things that you that can disrupt the
mitochondria to make them precipitate
cancer and how does that how does that
go about you know I've seen you know
somebody talking you talk about how this
actually precipitates the genetic uh
mutations that we see and attribute
blame to as causative
um but you're saying that that's
actually a knock-on effect
yeah so they're all the mutations are
all Downstream that'd be phenomenal as
are most of what people are studying
today
um are all Downstream the angiogenesis
the failure and apoptosis and all these
kinds of things they're all Downstream
of the original damage to the
mitochondria so to answer specifically
your question it's called the oncogenic
Paradox and this Paradox has uh
perplexed the cancer field for decades
in other words
um how is it possible that you could get
cancer from a whole range of different
kind of insults how what is it what is
the common
pathophysiological mechanism that could
underlie this uh range of cancer
initiators
um like for example some people
women may get breast cancer from a
clogged milk duck another one may get it
from some sort of viral infection
another one may get it from a unhealed
wound there's a whole variety of
different ways that could elicit elicit
a breast cancer you can do the same
thing you can consider the same thing
for possible colon cancers or bladder
cancers or lung cancers or any of these
kinds of things in other words there's
not any one of course smoking would
damage the mitochondria in certain lung
tissues and possibly other tissues
intermittent hypoxia you know radiation
chronic inflammation any any of these
kinds of insults could damage a cell in
a particular tissue damage the
mitochondria of a cell in a particular
tissue leading to dysregulated cell
growth in that tissue and the definition
of cancer is cell division out of
control or dysregulated cell growth how
does that happen it happens from damage
to the mitochondria in a particular cell
or populations of cells in a particular
tissue eliciting a growth a dysregulated
growth and that's the oncogenic Paradox
so you don't always get cancer from a
single insult it could come from a
variety of insults the bottom line is
that you end up with cells that are
dysregulated in their cell growth all of
which are fermenting and it's important
to regulate recognize that the
mitochondria of our cells is the
controller of the cell cycle so when
that organelle becomes defective the
cell falls back into a a a disregulated
cycle leading to and this is the way all
cells uh on the planet uh evolved before
oxygen came into the atmosphere 2.5
billion years ago we had living cells on
the planet before oxygen was in the
atmosphere and they were all fermenting
and they all had dysregulated cell
growth so the cancer cells in body these
are simply falling back on these ancient
Pathways that have always existed even
before respiration even before the
origination of the mitochondria so the
cells are just simply falling back and
as long as they have fermentable fuels
in the environment they're very
difficult to kill radiation and chemo
and all these things that we use are not
at the heart of the problem and as a
matter of fact some of the standards of
care actually facilitate the
availability of fermentable fuels making
the the management of the disease
impossible so that's why the current
standard of care makes no sense when one
considers the origin of the disease and
the concepts of evolutionary biology
yeah
um I I did read a study you know a
number of years ago where it spoke about
you know when people go into a ketogenic
diet and speaking specifically about
using ketosis in order to buy cancer and
and talk about mitochondria specifically
and showing that when in a state of
ketosis you actually your mitochondria
first of all uh were more efficient and
they also increased in number and so it
you know and it's this uh sort of
mechanism that uh would would protect
from cancer
um what is it about eating carbohydrates
and not being in ketosis that just jams
up our mitochondria so much
well I don't I don't think the
carbohydrates uh jam up the mitochondria
um what what happens is excessive
amounts of carbohydrates facilitate the
um it causes an inflammatory condition
in the body and it's this it's this
elevated uh inflammation the state of an
inflammation
um that uh uh contributes to the damage
so you know sugar itself is not a
carcinogen however uh chronic
consumption of excessive carbohydrates
can put the body in an imbalanced
nutritional State and that's what
elicits it's not only cancer it's type 2
diabetes it's Alzheimer's disease it's
cardiovascular disease essentially it's
all of the major chronic diseases that
we are currently suffering from is the
result of excessive amounts of
carbohydrates in the diet we as a
species did not evolve to eat large
amounts of carbohydrates it was only a
seasonal kind of situation a ripe fruit
a ripe Berry or something like this
would be the sweet maybe honey it wasn't
chronic exposure to high levels of
carbohydrates that are coming from the
foods that we presently have in our
societies and that is ultimately the
origin of the majority of chronic
diseases that we have is a diet that
what is does not fit our evolutionary
past yeah I 100 agree with you on that